---
title: Python 3, Bottle.py, Apache and WSGI - Import Nightmares
date: 2015-09-23 23:19:01
read: 4
image: ./sources/pixel_art/feather.png
---

At some point in a webdev's life, one might consider moving away from classic web development in for example PHP, and move on to more convenient frameworks. If you already know a language, learning another one just for web development can also seem like a waste of time. Alternatives might be more elegant, flexible, and better integrated with the things you're currently writing. I found myself in the position of having to demo my work on [author profiling](https://www.uni-weimar.de/medien/webis/events/pan-15/pan15-web/author-profiling.html) that was completely written in Python 3 (`omesa` + `sklearn`). The problem with
framework switching, I found, is learning how to do frustratingly arbitrary
operations all over again. Moreover, however sluggish
[LAMP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LAMP_%28software_bundle%29) set-ups might
seem, they are very robust, well-understood and have plenty of documentation.
Changing to more obscure environments like I did with `bottle.py` can shovel you
in the face at any point. It's been a bumpy road to say the least, so to help
any pursuers of this path in the future, I hereby present you with my findings
thus far.

## Bottle.py

[Bottle.py](http://bottlepy.org/docs/dev/index.html) is a very minimalistic web-
framework for Python. It is so small that delivering `hello world` to a port is
literally this:

``` python
"""file: helloworldinabottle.py"""
from bottle import route, run

@route('/')
def index():
    return "hello world"

run(host='localhost', port=8080)
```

It works with all your existing code and libraries that Python has. So say that
you want to test an already trained SVM classifier with
[bigram](http://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/feature_extraction.html#common-vectorizer-usage)
features on data fed by a query it can be as much as:

``` python
"""file: some_ml_example.py"""
from bottle import route, run
import sklearn
import pickle

clf = pickle.load(open('/somedir/model.pickle', 'rb'))
big = pickle.load(open('/somedir/bigram_vectorizer.pickLe', 'rb'))

@route('/<query>')
def index(query):
    v = big.transform([query]).toarray()
    return clf.predict(v)[0]

run(host='localhost', port=8080)
```

That's right, no POST, no GET, you can directly feed a string to `localhost` if
you desire (you can definitely also use POST and GET). And with these few lines
of code I was completely blown away by the
elegance of the framework. Everything pretty much peachy, until you actually
want to implement your app in an existing web server environment. Chances are
huge that this will be in Apache. Traditional protocols for Apache do not handle
these kind of apps, though, and so WSGI was brought to life.

## Apache & WSGI

Without filling this post with the [specifics](http://www.fullstackpython.com/wsgi-servers.html)
and motivations behind WSGI, let's immediately jump into how to configure
Bottle.py and Apache to run this stuff. First we need to do a bit of work in
our `some_ml_example.py` that had the bottle code. After renaming it to `app.wsgi` it should contain the following:

``` python
"""file: app.wsgi"""
import os, sys
import bottle
from beaker.middleware import SessionMiddleware

os.chdir(os.path.dirname(__file__))
sys.path.append(os.path.dirname(__file__))

application = SessionMiddleware(bottle.app())

clf = pickle.load(open('/somedir/model.pickle', 'rb'))
big = pickle.load(open('/somedir/bigram_vectorizer.pickLe', 'rb'))

@bottle.route('/<query>')
def index(query):
    v = big.transform([query]).toarray()
    return clf.predict(v)[0]

```

So obviously we are not serving to a port anymore. Apache will pick up the
app and serve it to wherever you wish. The `path` part is important as the
directory orientation changes when everything is loaded into Apache, so your
new app still needs to know where all the files are at. Notice that we've also
added a dependency; `beaker`. Beaker does... Now that our file is done, we need
to configure Apache to fetch it. In Linux, this is done as follows:

``` bash
cd /etc/apache2/sites-available
nano yourappname.conf
```

Around the web, I found the tendency for people to explain that adding a `bottle` application to Apache requires the following config:


``` html
WSGIDaemonProcess yourapp user=you group=somegroup processes=1 threads=5
<Directory /home/directory/to/webserver/html/appdir/app.wsgi>
  WSGIProcessGroup somegroup
  WSGIApplicationGroup %{GLOBAL}
  Order deny,allow
  Allow from all
</Directory>
```

If all is well, and [`mod_wsgi`](https://code.google.com/p/modwsgi/) is installed and loaded into Apache,
at least the `route("/")` we used in `helloworldinabottle.py` should be working
after an Apache restart or reload. Now, however that may be true and may or not
work for everyone, it was working fine for my previous websites. Not for this
one, though.

## The WSGI Deadlock

When I started to work on the demo, and tried to load an example similar to
`some_ml_example.py` that included `import sklearn`, the bottle page where it
was loaded would hang up. Just loading forever, and the Apache error log would
not report anything. After searching all the possible query combinations of
"apache bottle import module page hangs should I quit building websites
starting now", I found one particular page that described part the issue on
stackoverflow. Case in point is what's called a deadlock; when applications are
not assigned to a system-wide application group, they are considered to be an
instance of Apache. Now, Apache doesn't like doing any heavy lifting in terms
of loading of interpreting, caching and running processes; that's why most of
that stuff is capped to a maximum amount of CPU and Memory load. This is why
`imports` of very large packages take forever and will probably never resolve
in any time that users of your website would want to wait. Now, the issue
**should** actually already be resolved! After all, we included the WSGI
Applictiongroup to be `%{GLOBAL}`, which should do processing on the local
system. Apparently that's not working very well now
is it? I carried on looking up what might be the issue, when I struck upon
another stackoverflow post that mentioned specifying the Process and
Applicationgroup separately in newer versions of `mod_wsgi`. The changes
required for this are again done in the
`/etc/apache2/sites-enabled/yourapp.wsgi`, as follows:

``` html
WSGIDaemonProcess yourapp user=you group=somegroup processes=1 threads=5
WSGIApplication /yourapp /dir/to/app/app.wsgi process-group=yourapp application-group=%{GLOBAL}
<Directory /home/directory/to/webserver/html/appdir/app.wsgi>
  WSGIProcessGroup %{GLOBAL}
  WSGIApplicationGroup %{GLOBAL}
  Order deny,allow
  Allow from all
</Directory>
```

Now after a good `sudo service apache2 restart` you application should be
working as expected! Hope this helped!
